---
layout: post
title: What I've learned about User Interface Design
---

A significant learning point for me, as a part of the Industry Dive design team, is the user first mentality. Above form is the function, and above all is the user. Up until this point, I haven’t had to put much thought into meeting the exact needs of a customer or user. I’ve also learned how in order to have an effective design, users must be able to easily recognize what it is, understand what the interface is interacting with, know what will happen when they use it and successfully interact with it.

I’ve learned that design is not all about flash & the "wow" factor, it's not about how many snazzy animations you can fit onto a site. It's about using this flash & "wow" in more calculated & strategic ways. To call attention to what is important on your site/application and not to overwhelm the user with too much. Honor the user’s attention and not only will they be happy, but you will get better results. You have to let the user know what to expect at every turn, give them insight about what will happen if they follow this link, or click that button. Don’t worry about stating the obvious for the user, if there is an image of a hamburger menu, put text next to it stating that its a menu. If there is search input, a magnifying glass icon may not be enough, go ahead and put some text saying search next to it. What’s obvious to you, may not be obvious to the user.  This keeps the user from unplanned outcomes or surprising interactions. I’ve also learned that users are most comfortable when things behave the way they expect, a user should be able to predict how an interface element will behave just by looking at it. If it looks like a button it should be a button. Don’t get fancy with the basics of interaction, keep it simple and predictable. Elements that look the same should be the same, stay consistent. Visual hierarchy and visual weight have been an integral part of the fundamentals I’ve learned. There should be a clear viewing order to the visual elements on the screen, if you change the visual weight of a single element, you may need to change the visual weight of all elements to once again achieve a strong hierarchy. Visual hierarchy is on the easiest ways to strengthen or weaken a design.

One of the first things I learned of Industry Dive’s design philosophy is their use of color to highlight certain things and to guide the attention of the user to where they want. This results in more interaction and views to things like their newsletter, which in turn, results in more ad space sales, which equals more money for the company.
