---
layout: post
title: What's the difference between Wireframes and Mockups?
---

As a burgeoning junior web developer, I was accustomed to creating wireframes as part of the planning before I coded any application. Wireframes are developed usually using simpler and cheaper technologies, often just pen and paper, to give a better picture of the final output. Wireframing can save time and money, whether conception, development or design, saved time can mean saved resources. As Jesse Shawl, one of my GA web development instructors, used to tell us: “An hour of planning, saves you 10 hours of coding.” I keep that advice in mind anytime I start a new project. I use my wireframes to visualize a general layout of the website or app. The few times I haven’t properly planned before building a site or application, things sometimes haven’t gone smoothly. Starting with a solid planning stage is paramount to success when it comes to development or design.

Creating mockups are a new thing for me, something I wasn't taught in the Web Development course. I first learned of mockups through the UX Design cohort that ran concurrently at GA with my Web Development cohort. I got to see how they planned and created their designs for sites/applications. Although I couldn’t really focus on what they were doing because I was focused on my own web development tasks. However, I was more interested in the UX designers process than the most of my classmates. When the UXDI students had presentations of their latest projects, I tried to attend as many as I could. I asked them questions about what programs they were using to create their mockups, these programs were Sketch and InVision. They created static mockups with these programs, as well as high-fidelity mockups with interactions.

I learned why and how a mockup would be used when I joined the Industry Dive design team. A mockup provides visual details, like colors and typography, and gives the viewer a more realistic impression of how the final product will look. A mockup is useful to clients, investors, and stakeholders because of its superior visuals, allowing them to better review the visual side of the final product. Mockups can also help the designer to examine the visual hierarchies and if any of the visual elements clash. If there are any changes to be made, mockups allow the designer to quickly make revisions as they do not require coding. It allows team members to communicate their ideas to each other about the design. Having a mockup gives the designer/developer an idea or guideline of how the final product should look and how it may function.

I also learned the difference between a mockup and a high-fidelity mockup and when each should be used. High fidelity mockups are what I was viewing when I attended the UXDI cohort’s design presentations. They had interactions and worked as if they were actual websites, but they used no code. This allows the user to visualize the link or interaction between elements before any coding occurs, again saving time and resources. An important thing I’ve learned since joining the Industry Dive team is to never wireframe, mockup or code without having a proper plan and to keep the user in mind. 
